**OAuth clients come in many different forms and styles, but they can be broadly categorized into one of three categories: *web applications, in-browser applications, and native applications***. Each of these has its own strengths and weaknesses, and we’ll cover them in turn.

---

### Web applications

**The original use case of the OAuth client is the web application**. *These are applications that execute on a remote server and are accessed through a web browser*. The application configuration and its runtime state are held on the web server, and the browser connection is usually connected using a session cookie.

**These applications are able to make full use of both front- and back-channel communication methods**. Since the user is already interacting through a browser, activating a request on the front channel is as simple as sending an HTTP redirect message to the browser. Listening for the response on the front channel is equally simple as the application is already listening for HTTP requests. Back channel communication can occur by making an HTTP call directly from the web server running the application. Because of this flexibility, web applications can easily use the authorization code, client credentials, or assertions flows most effectively. Since the fragment component of the request URI isn’t usually passed to the server by the browser, the implicit flow doesn’t work for web applications in most circumstances.

We’ve covered several examples and variations of web applications in chapters 2 and 3, so we’re not going to cover them in any additional depth here.

---

### Browser applications

**Browser applications are those that execute entirely inside the web browser, typically using JavaScript**. *Although the code for the application does need to be served from a web server, the code itself doesn’t execute on the server, and the web server doesn’t keep any of the runtime state of the application*. Instead, everything about the application happens on the end user’s computer inside their web browser.

**These clients can easily use the front channel, as sending the user to another page through an HTTP redirect is trivial**. Responses from the front channel are also simple, as the client’s software does need to be loaded from a web server. **However, back-channel communication is more complicated, as browser applications are limited by same-origin policies and other security restrictions designed to prevent cross-domain attacks**. Consequently, these types of applications are best suited for the implicit flow, which has been optimized for this case.

---

### Native applications

**Native applications are those that run directly on the end user’s device, be it a computer or mobile platform**. *The software for the application is generally compiled or packaged externally and then installed on the device*.

**These applications can easily make use of the back channel by making a direct HTTP call outbound to the remote server**. **Since the user isn’t in a web browser, as they are with a web application or a browser client, the front channel is more problematic**. To make a front-channel request, the native application needs to be able to reach out to the system web browser or an embedded browser view to get the user to the authorization server directly. To listen for front-channel responses, the native application needs to be able to serve a URI that the browser can be redirected to by the authorization server. This usually takes one of the following forms:

* An embedded web server running on `localhost`
* A remote web server with some type of out-of-band push notification capability to the application
* A custom URI scheme such as `com.oauthinaction.mynativeapp:/` that is registered with the operating system such that the application is called when URIs with that scheme are accessed

For mobile applications, the custom URI scheme is the most common. Native applications are capable of using the authorization code, client credentials, or assertion flows easily, but because they can keep information out of the web browser, it is not recommended that native applications use the implicit flow.

---

### Handling secrets

**The purpose of the client secret is to let an instance of client software authenticate itself to the authorization server, apart from any authorizations conferred to it by the resource owner**. The client secret isn’t available to the resource owner or the browser, allowing it to uniquely identify the client software application. **In OAuth 1.0, every client was expected to have its own client secret (known as a consumer key in that specification), regardless of the kind of client that it was**. **However, as we’ve seen throughout this chapter, not all OAuth clients are created equal. Although a web application can be configured with a client secret away from the browser and end user, native applications and browser applications can’t**.

**The problem comes from needing to differentiate between configuration time secrets, which every copy of a client gets, and runtime secrets, which are distinct for each instance**. Client secrets are configuration time secrets because they represent the client software itself and are configured into the client software. Access tokens, refresh tokens, and authorization codes are all runtime secrets because they’re stored by the client software after it is deployed and running. **Runtime secrets do still need to be stored securely and protected appropriately, but they’re designed to be easily [revocable](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/revocable) and [rotatable](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rotatable)**. **Configuration time secrets, in contrast, are generally things that aren’t expected to change often**.

**In OAuth 2.0, this dichotomy is addressed by removing the requirement for all clients to have a client secret and instead defining two classes of clients, public clients and confidential clients, based on their ability to keep a configuration time secret**.

**Public clients, as the name suggests, are unable to hold configuration time secrets and therefore have no client secret**. *This is usually because the code for the client is exposed to the end user in some fashion, either by being downloaded and executed in a browser or by executing natively on the user’s device*. Consequently, most browser applications and many native applications are public clients. **In either case, each copy of the client software is identical and there are potentially many instances of it**. The user of any instance could extract the configuration information for that instance, including any configured client ID and client secret. Although all instances share the same client ID, this doesn’t cause a problem because the client ID isn’t intended to be a secret value. Anyone attempting to impersonate this client by copying its client ID will still need to use its redirect URIs and be bound by other measures. Having an additional client secret, in this case, does no good because it could be extracted and copied along with the client ID.

A potential mitigation is available for applications that use the authorization code flow in the form of Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE), discussed in chapter 10. The PKCE protocol extension allows a client to more tightly bind its initial request to the authorization code that it receives, but without using a client secret or equivalent.

**Confidential clients are able to hold configuration time secrets**. **Each instance of the client software has a distinct configuration, including its client ID and secret, and these values are difficult to extract by end users**. A web application is the most common type of confidential client, as it represents a single instance running on a web server that can handle multiple resource owners with a single OAuth client. The client ID can be gathered as it is exposed through the web browser, but the client secret is passed only in the back channel and is never directly exposed.

**An alternative approach to this problem is to use dynamic client registration, discussed in depth in chapter 12**. *By using dynamic client registration, an instance of a piece of client software can register itself at runtime. This effectively turns what would otherwise need to be a configuration time secret into a runtime secret, allowing a higher level of security and functionality to clients that would otherwise be unable to use it*.

