**Let’s take a look at an OAuth authorization grant process in detail**. We’re going to be looking at all of the different steps between the different actors, tracing the HTTP requests and responses for each step. In particular, we’ll be following the **authorization code grant** as used with a web-based client application. This client will be interactively authorized directly by the resource owner.

**:key:The authorization code grant uses a temporary credential, the authorization code, to represent the resource owner’s delegation to the client:key:**, and it looks like what is shown in figure 2.1:framed_picture:.

Let’s break this down into individual steps. :one:**First, the resource owner goes to the client application and indicates to the client that they would like it to use a particular protected resource on their behalf**. For instance, this is where the user would tell the printing service to use a specific photo storage service. This service is an API that the client knows how to process, and the client knows that it needs to use OAuth to do so. :two:**When the client realizes that it needs to get a new OAuth access token, it sends the resource owner to the authorization server with a request that indicates that the client is asking to be delegated some piece of authority by that resource owner (figure 2.2:framed_picture:)**. For example, our photo printer could ask the photo-storage service for the ability to read the photos stored there.

*Since we have a web client, this takes the form of an HTTP redirect to the authorization server’s authorization endpoint. The response from the client application looks like this*:

```http
HTTP/1.1 302 Moved Temporarily
x-powered-by: Express
Location: http://localhost:9001/authorize?response_type=code&scope=foo&client
_id=oauth-client-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Flocalhost%3A9000%2Fcallback&
state=Lwt50DDQKUB8U7jtfLQCVGDL9cnmwHH1
Vary: Accept
Content-Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
Content-Length: 444
Date: Fri, 31 Jul 2015 20:50:19 GMT
Connection: keep-alive
```

*This redirect to the browser causes the browser to send an HTTP GET to the authorization server*.

```http
GET /authorize?response_type=code&scope=foo&client_id=oauth-client
-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Flocalhost%3A9000%
2Fcallback&state=Lwt50DDQKUB8U7jtfLQCVGDL9cnmwHH1 HTTP/1.1
Host: localhost:9001
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10.10; rv:39.0)
Gecko/20100101 Firefox/39.0
Accept: text/html,application/xhtml+xml,application/xml;q=0.9,*/*;q=0.8
Referer: http://localhost:9000/
Connection: keep-alive
```

*The client identifies itself and requests particular items such as scopes by including query parameters in the URL it sends the user to*. *The authorization server can parse those parameters and act accordingly, even though the client isn’t making the request directly*.

:three:**Next, the authorization server will usually require the user to authenticate. This step is essential in determining who the resource owner is and what rights they’re allowed to delegate to the client (see figure 2.3:framed_picture:)**.

**The user’s authentication passes directly between the user (and their browser) and the authorization server; it’s never seen by the client application**. This essential aspect protects the user from having to share their credentials with the client application, the antipattern that OAuth was invented to [combat](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/combat) (as discussed in the last chapter).

**Additionally, since the resource owner interacts with the authorization endpoint through a browser, their authentication happens through a browser as well**. Thus, a wide variety of authentication techniques are available to the user authentication process. **:key:OAuth doesn’t [dictate](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/dictate) the authentication technology:key:**, and the authorization server is free to choose methods such as a username/password pair, cryptographic certificates, security tokens, federated single-sign-on, or any number of other possibilities. We do have to trust the web browser to a certain extent here, especially if the resource owner is using a simple authentication method such as username and password, but the OAuth protocol is designed to protect against several major kinds of browser-based attacks, which we’ll cover in chapters 7, 8, and 9.

**This separated approach also [insulates](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/insulate) the client from changes to the user’s authentication methods, allowing a simple client application to benefit from [emergent](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/emergent) techniques such as risk-based [heuristic](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/heuristic) authentication applied at the authorization server**. This doesn’t convey any information about the authenticated user to the client, however; this is a topic we’ll cover in depth in chapter 13.

:four:**Next, the user authorizes the client application (figure 2.4:framed_picture:)**. In this step, the resource owner chooses to delegate some portion of their authority to the client application, and the authorization server has many different options to make this work. The client’s request can include an indication of what kind of access it’s looking for (known as the OAuth scope, discussed in section 2.4). The authorization server can allow the user to deny some or all of these scopes, or it can let the user approve or deny the request as a whole.

**Furthermore, many authorization servers allow the storage of this authorization decision for future use**. If this is used, then future requests for the same access by the same client won’t prompt the user interactively. The user will still be redirected to the authorization endpoint, and will still need to be logged in, but the decision to delegate authority to the client will have already been made during a previous attempt. **The authorization server can even override the end user’s decision based on an internal policy such as a client whitelist or blacklist**.

:five:**Next, the authorization server redirects the user back to the client application (­figure 2.5:framed_picture:)**.

This takes the form of an HTTP redirect to the client’s redirect_uri .

```http
HTTP 302 Found
Location: http://localhost:9000/oauth_callback?code=8V1pr0rJ&state=Lwt50DDQKU
B8U7jtfLQCVGDL9cnmwHH1
```

This in turn causes the browser to issue the following request back to the client:

```http
GET /callback?code=8V1pr0rJ&state=Lwt50DDQKUB8U7jtfLQCVGDL9cnmwHH1 HTTP/1.1
Host: localhost:9000
// Notice that this HTTP request is to the client and not on the authorization server.
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10.10; rv:39.0)
Gecko/20100101 Firefox/39.0
Accept: text/html,application/xhtml+xml,application/xml;q=0.9,*/*;q=0.8
Referer: http://localhost:9001/authorize?response_type=code&scope=foo&client_
id=oauth-client-1&redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Flocalhost%3A9000%2Fcallback&
state=Lwt50DDQKUB8U7jtfLQCVGDL9cnmwHH1
Connection: keep-alive
```

*Since we’re using the **authorization code grant type**, this redirect includes the special code query parameter. The value of this parameter is a one-time-use credential known as the **authorization code**, and it represents the result of the user’s authorization decision. The client can parse this parameter to get the authorization code value when the request comes in, and it will use that code in the next step. The client will also check that the value of the **state parameter** matches the value that it sent in the previous step*.

:six:**Now that the client has the code, it can send it back to the authorization server on its token endpoint (figure 2.6)**.

*The client performs an HTTP POST with its parameters as a form-encoded HTTP entity body, passing its client_id and client_secret as an HTTP Basic authorization header. This HTTP request is made directly between the client and the authorization server, without involving the browser or resource owner at all*.

```http
POST /token
Host: localhost:9001
Accept: application/json
Content-type: application/x-www-form-encoded
Authorization: Basic b2F1dGgtY2xpZW50LTE6b2F1dGgtY2xpZW50LXNlY3JldC0x
grant_type=authorization_code&
redirect_uri=http%3A%2F%2Flocalhost%3A9000%2Fcallback&code=8V1pr0rJ
```

This separation between different HTTP connections ensures that the client can authenticate itself directly without other components being able to see or manipulate the token request.

:seven:**The authorization server takes in this request and, if valid, issues a token (figure 2.7:framed_picture:)**. *The authorization server performs a number of steps to ensure the request is [legitimate](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/legitimate)*. First, it validates the client’s credentials (passed in the Authorization header here) to determine which client is requesting access. Then, it reads the value of the code parameter from the body and looks up any information it has about that authorization code, including which client made the initial authorization request, which user authorized it, and what it was authorized for. If the authorization code is valid, has not been used previously, and the client making this request is the same as the client that made the original request, the authorization server generates and returns a new access token for the client.

This token is returned in the HTTP response as a JSON object.

```http
HTTP 200 OK
Date: Fri, 31 Jul 2015 21:19:03 GMT
Content-type: application/json
{
“access_token”: “987tghjkiu6trfghjuytrghj”,
“token_type”: “Bearer”
}
```

The client can now parse the token response and get the access token value from it to be used at the protected resource. In this case, we have an OAuth Bearer token, as indicated by the token_type field in the response. The response can also include a refresh token (used to get new access tokens without asking for authorization again) as well as additional information about the access token, like a hint about the token’s
scopes and expiration time. The client can store this access token in a secure place for as long as it wants to use the token, even after the user has left.

:eight:**With the token in hand, the client can present the token to the protected resource (see figure 2.8:framed_picture:)**.

The client has several methods for presenting the access token, and in this example we’re going to use the recommended method of using the Authorization header.

```http
GET /resource HTTP/1.1
Host: localhost:9002
Accept: application/json
Connection: keep-alive
Authorization: Bearer 987tghjkiu6trfghjuytrghj
```

The protected resource can then parse the token out of the header, determine whether it’s still valid, look up information regarding who authorized it and what it was authorized for, and return the response accordingly. A protected resource has a number of options for doing this token lookup, which we’ll cover in greater depth in chapter 11. The simplest option is for the resource server and the authorization server to share a database that contains the token information. The authorization server writes new tokens into the store when they’re generated, and the resource server reads tokens from the store when they’re presented.

