**Now that we know the different parts of an OAuth system, let’s take a look at how exactly they communicate with each other**. OAuth is an HTTP-based protocol, but unlike most HTTP-based protocols, OAuth communication doesn’t always happen through a simple HTTP request and response.

---

### Back-channel communication

Many parts of the OAuth process use a normal HTTP request and response format to communicate to each other. **Since these requests generally occur outside the [purview](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/purview) of the resource owner and user agent, they are collectively referred to as *back-channel communication* (figure 2.11:framed_picture:)**.

These requests and responses make use of all the regular HTTP mechanisms to communicate: headers, query parameters, methods, and entity bodies can all contain information vital to the transaction. Note that this might be a bit more of the HTTP stack than you’re used to, as many simple web APIs allow the client developer to pay attention to the response body.

**The authorization server provides a token endpoint that the client uses to request access tokens and refresh tokens**. The client calls this endpoint directly, presenting a form-encoded set of parameters that the authorization server parses and processes. The authorization server then responds with a JSON object representing the token.

**Additionally, when the client connects to the protected resource, it’s also making a direct HTTP call in the back channel**. The details of this call are entirely dependent on the protected resource, as OAuth can be used to protect an [extraordinarily](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/extraordinarily) wide variety of APIs and architecture styles. In all of these, the client presents the OAuth token and the protected resource must be able to understand the token and the rights that it represents.

---

### Front-channel communication

In normal HTTP communication, as we saw in the previous section, the HTTP client sends a request that contains headers, query parameters, an entity body, and other pieces of information directly to a server. The server can then look at those pieces of information and figure out how to respond to the request, using an HTTP response containing headers, an entity body, and other pieces of information. **However, in OAuth there are several instances in which two components cannot make direct requests of and responses to each other**, such as when the client interacts with the authorization endpoint of the authorization server. ***Front-channel communication* is a method of using HTTP requests to communicate indirectly between two systems through an intermediary web browser (figure 2.12:framed_picture:)**.

**This technique isolates the sessions on either side of the browser, which allows it to work across different security domains**. For instance, if the user needs to authenticate to one of the components, they can do so without exposing their credentials to the other system. **We can keep information separate and still communicate in the presence of the user**.

**:key:How can two pieces of software communicate without ever talking to each other?:key:** **Front-channel communication works by attaching parameters to a URL and indicating that the browser should follow that URL. The receiving party can then parse the incoming URL, as fetched by the browser, and consume the presented information. The receiving party can then respond by redirecting the browser back to a URL hosted by the originator, using the same method of adding parameters. The two parties are thus communicating with each other indirectly through the use of the web browser as an intermediary**. This means that each front-channel request and response is actually a pair of HTTP request and response transactions (figure 2.13:framed_picture:).

For example, in the authorization code grant that we saw previously, the client needs to send the user to the authorization endpoint, but it also needs to communicate certain parts of its request to the authorization server. To do this, the client sends an HTTP redirect to the browser. The target of this redirect is the server’s URL with certain fields attached to it as query parameters:

```http
HTTP 302 Found 
Location: http://localhost:9001/authorize?client_id=oauth-client-1&response_type=code&state=843hi43824h42tj
```

The authorization server can parse the incoming URL, just like any other HTTP request, and find the information sent from the client in these parameters. The authorization server can interact with the resource owner at this stage, authenticating them and asking for authorization over a series of HTTP transactions with the browser. When it’s time to return the authorization code to the client, the authorization server sends an HTTP redirect to the browser as well, but this time with the client’s redirect_uri as the base. The authorization server also includes its own query parameters in the redirect:

```http
HTTP 302 Found
Location: http://localhost:9000/oauth_callback?code=23ASKBWe4&state=843hi43824h42tj
```

When the browser follows this redirect, it will be served by the client application, in this case through an HTTP request. The client can parse the URL parameters from the incoming request. In this way, the client and authorization server can pass messages back and forth to each other through an intermediary without ever talking to each other directly.

**All information passed through the front channel is accessible to the browser, both to be read and potentially manipulated before the ultimate request is made**. *The OAuth protocol accounts for this by limiting the kinds of information that are passed through the front channel, and by making sure that none of the pieces of information used in the front channel can be used on their own to accomplish the task of delegation*. In the canonical case we saw in this chapter, the authorization code can’t be used by the browser directly, but instead it must be presented alongside the client’s credentials in the back channel. Some protocols, such as OpenID Connect, offer increased security through mechanisms for these front-channel messages to be signed by the client or authorization server to add a further layer of protection, and we’ll look at that briefly in chapter 13.

