**OAuth 2.0 is a *delegation protocol*, :key:*a means of letting someone who controls a resource allow a software application to access that resource on their behalf without [impersonating](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/impersonate) them***:key:. *The application requests authorization from the owner of the resource and receives tokens that it can use to access the resource. This all happens without the application needing to impersonate the person who controls the resource, since the token explicitly represents a delegated right of access*. **In many ways, you can think of the OAuth token as a :key:*“[valet](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/valet) key”*:key: for the web**. Not all cars have a valet key, but for those that do, the valet key provides additional security beyond simply handing over the regular key. **The valet key of a car allows the owner of the car to give limited access to someone, the valet, without handing over full control in the form of the owner’s key**. Simple valet keys limit the valet to accessing the [ignition](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/ignition) and doors but not the [trunk](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/trunk) or [glove box](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/glove-box?q=glove%2Bbox). More complex valet keys can limit the upper speed of the car and even shut the car off if it travels more than a set distance from its starting point, sending an alert to the owner. **In much the same way, OAuth tokens can limit the client’s access to only the actions that the resource owner has delegated**.

**For example, let’s say that you have a cloud photo-storage service and a photo-printing service, and you want to be able to print the photos that you have stored in your storage service**. Luckily, your cloud-printing service can communicate with your cloud-storage service using an API. This is great, except that the two services are run by different companies, which means that your account with the storage service has no connection to your account with the printing service. We can use OAuth to solve this problem by letting you delegate access to your photos across the different services, all without giving your password away to the photo printer.

**We know that OAuth is a security protocol, but what exactly does it do?** Since you’re holding a book that’s [purportedly](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/purportedly) about OAuth 2.0, that’s a fair question. According to **[the specification that defines it](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749)**:

> :key:The OAuth 2.0 authorization framework enables a third-party application to obtain limited access to an HTTP service, either on behalf of a resource owner by [orchestrating](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/orchestrate) an approval interaction between the resource owner and the HTTP service, or by allowing the third-party application to obtain access on its own behalf:key:.

**Let’s unpack that a bit: as an authorization framework, *OAuth is all about getting the right of access from one component of a system to another***. **In particular, in the OAuth world, a client application wants to gain access to a protected resource on behalf of a resource owner (usually an end user)**. These are the components that we have so far:

* **The resource owner has access to an API and can delegate access to that API**. The resource owner is usually a person and is generally assumed to have access to a web browser. Consequently, this book’s diagrams represent this [party](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/party) as *a person sitting with a web browser*.
* **The protected resource is the component that the resource owner has access to**. This can take many different forms, but for the most part it’s a web API of some kind. Even though the name “resource” makes it sound as though this is something to be downloaded, these APIs can allow read, write, and other operations just as well. This book’s diagrams show protected resources as *a [rack](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/rack) of servers with a lock icon*.
* **The client is the piece of software that accesses the protected resource on behalf of the resource owner**. If you’re a web developer, the name “client” might make you think this is the web browser, but that’s not how the term is used here. If you’re a business application developer, you might think of the “client” as the person who’s paying for your services, but that’s not what we’re talking about, either. **In OAuth, the client is whatever software consumes the API that [makes up](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/make-sth-up) the protected resource**. Whenever you see “client” in this book, we’re almost certainly talking about this OAuth-specific definition. This book’s diagrams depict clients as **a computer screen with gears**. This is partially in deference to the fact that there are many different forms of client applications, as we’ll see in chapter
  6, so no one icon will universally suffice.

*We’ll cover these all in greater depth in chapter 2 when we look at “The OAuth Dance” in detail. But for now, we need to realize that we’ve got one goal in this whole setup: getting the client to access the protected resource for the resource owner (see figure 1.2:book:)*.

**In the printing example, let’s say you’ve uploaded your vacation photos to the photo-storage site, and now you want to have them printed**. **The storage site’s API is the resource, and the printing service is the client of that API. You, as the resource owner, need to be able to delegate part of your authority to the printer so that it can read your photos**. You probably don’t want the printer to be able to read all of your photos, nor do you want the printer to be able to delete photos or upload new ones of its own. Ultimately, what you’re interested in is getting certain photos printed, and if you’re like most users, you’re not going to be thinking about the security architectures of the systems you’re using to get that done.

Thankfully, because you’re reading this book, chances are that you’re not like most users and you do care about security architectures. **In the next section, we’ll see how this problem could be solved imperfectly without OAuth, and then we’ll look at how OAuth can solve it in a better way**.